People who come to these places are always looking for something. Some are Shambhala, aliens from outer space, others are peace of mind and harmony. Indeed, the Altai mountain Belukha, according to one of the legends in Asia, is the future northern Shambhala, a paradise that will come after the disappearance of people. Lady, a snow-white mountain, feeding all the rivers and fields, ready to give treasures, it was esteemed all over Asia as sacred from ancient times. Tradition says that it is on this mountain is the navel of the Earth, energetically connected with the cosmos, giving people a charge of vivacity and health, opening up new knowledge.

We learned about the mysterious Belukha from the notes of Nicholas Roerich. He considered this peak to be one of several places on our planet through which the Earth receives the divine energy of the cosmos. By the way, today enterprising travel agencies offer their clients to visit in the vicinity of Belukha the Jarlu Gorge (Edelweiss Valley), which is popular among ufologists. According to the latter, it is here that the cosmodrome is located for landing a UFO. And according to legend, it is in the Jarlu that one of the entrances to the mysterious country of Shambhala is located ... Altai shamans specify that Shambhala is inside the sacred Belukha, but in another spatial dimension. And you can see it only in a modified state of consciousness, and this is not given to everyone.

In India, far to the south of Asia, they were told that in the north, in the mountainous country of Altai, on the right bank of the Katun, a multi-headed mountain rises high into the sky, the value of which is equal to the world mountain Sumeru. In the Indian sacred Vedas it is written that the Belukha is called to define the center from the four oceans, since it is located almost equidistant from the three oceans - the Arctic, the Pacific and the Indian, for which is called in the ancient letters the umbilical cord of the Earth.

Belukha has several names, each nation has its own. One of the names given to it by the Altaians themselves is Tsagan-Ubugun - The White Old Man. The gray-haired head of the Old Man, according to their ideas, reached the very top of the world that is close to the Big Dipper. Belukha was revered in Altai and because, according to the legends, the dragon, the bearer of world evil, found his death from the divine heavenly bird on its summit.

In 1926, Nicholas Roerich made an expedition to the Altai Mountains at the foot of Belukha. The Golden Mountains (according to one of the hypotheses, the word Altai originated from the Turkic altan, altyn - golden) interested Roerich as the northernmost point of the mountain world of Central Asia, as one of the main corridors along which the ancient peoples moved from center of Asia in the plains of Siberia and further, to Europe. As a place of interest of its ancient culture, philosophy. It's strange and wonderful, Roerich wrote before his expedition. - Everywhere around the edge of praise Altai! And the mountains are beautiful, and the bowels are mighty, and the rivers are fast, and the flowers are unseen ... They say that in the Altai in the spring some special red lilies bloom. Whence this general veneration of Altai? . The meeting with the sacred mountain not only did not disappoint the artist, but also stunned him, forever put in his heart a love for Altai. The numerous monuments of the ancient cultures of the Golden Hills - caves with traces of ancient man's sites, mounds, stone sculptures, astonished him. He wrote: Altai - the Himalayas, two poles, two magnets.

In the Altai Belukha is called Uch-Syur, or Uch-Orion. Syur means dwelling of the gods and corresponds to the Mongolian Sumer and Indian Sumeru. Uch in Turkic - three. We can say that the mountain Belukha means three dwellings of the gods, or the dwelling of the three gods. Belokha gods worshipers, according to the beliefs of the Altaians, were supposed to ascend it only in a white hudaku (most likely, these are the languages ​​of glaciers and snowfields.) - Ed.). Although the local people are not close to their shrine. In general, the cult of mountains is very developed in Asia - it is necessary to approach the sacred or revered top with humility in the heart, with pure thoughts. And it is not so easy to get close to the shrine of the Golden Mountains, a lot of obstacles stand in the way of travelers.

Another name Belukha - Uch-Orion - is associated with three stars of the belt - the constellation of Orion. Consequently, the former Belukha has some relation to this constellation, and more specifically to the Orion belt. In the book of ancient oriental legends Cryptograms of the East there is a legend about the holy stone, which appeared from the sky as the messenger of distant worlds, as a gift of Orion. In the legends, there are three specific stars that sent a stone to the world. These are the stars of the Orion belt, which were formerly called, as Nikolai Roerich writes, three magicians. Recall, it is in the Altai, there are three world religions-Christianity, Buddhism and Islam. Perhaps, this meaning hides this name?

By the way, there is a bold version about the fact that Belukha is the birthplace of the Buddha, say, from here he went to India and to Tibet. The Indian epos Mahabharata speaks of Belukha (in India, Meru): Above the cup of that lotus, Meru rises up to heaven, and on it, the worlds produced the passing ruler. At sunrise and at sunset, the circle of pradakshans around the king mountains, the great golden Meru,  The northern land, oh worthy, illuminates with its radiance the glorious great Meru, the blessed refuge of those who know Brahman. There - the abode of Brahma - Prajapati, the soul of the existent and the Creator of everything that moves and is motionless. The Great Meru is the fertile haven of those who are called born of Mind, Look - on the highest peak of Meru, where there is not a single speck of dust, the Ancestor himself sits along with the pacified gods. In the south of Asia the Buddha came from the north, hence, from our territories. But was he in Altai? It is certainly impossible to say for sure, but suddenly found in the Altai its sculptural images, Buddhist cave altars and many other attributes related to the Buddha.

So, according to the ancient Altai legend, the ancient ruler of Altai Oirot, nicknamed by the people as White Burkhan, had to retreat after the battles with the enemies of his people. He went with his soldiers to unknown lands, promising to return and restore the state of Altaians without fail. When the people asked what the signs of his return to the Altai would be, Oyrot answered: Look at the sun and the outlines of the backs of the three snowy peaks of the holy mountain of the Altai people of Katynbash. And Katynbash is Belukha. It changed its contours at the beginning of the 20th century: as a result of a strong earthquake in the Altai, one of the three peaks of the sacred mountain fell off, and Belukha became biceps. The amazed people began to search for signs on the Sun, but, not finding them, all the same became agitated. Moreover, it was at this time that a rumor swept through the villages of the indigenous inhabitants of Altai that a young Altai woman met a stranger in the mountains who confidently predicted the early arrival of Oirot and urged him to wait for him.

The mysterious prophet said the same about what should be done to meet Burkhan Khan (that's how the people called Oirot). The Altai needed to turn their backs on the local shamans and no longer participate in their rituals, bring fire to the wooden gods of shamans, do not bring more horses as sacrifices, abandon traditional rites and dances, bury weapons in the ground so that opponents of the old faith could not let him stroke. In the worship of the gods, everything was now simplified: it was possible to confine oneself to the burning of fragrant juniper, the performance of consonant singing and respectful obeisances to White Burkhan. Nicholas Roerich believed that the White Burkhan - this is the Blessed Buddha.

After all these significant events in the Altai, the general fascination of the people with a new local religion began, which was called Burkhanism. Under the leadership of the local shepherd Chet Cholpanova, the Altaians, hung with colored rags of cloth, gathered in the Derain Logs in thousands, performed prayers and watched the Sun, fearing not to notice the solemn moment of the appearance of the sign. The authorities were alarmed, since the participants of the Derenov assemblies refused to obey the established procedures, stating: The Altaians will soon have their own king! This infuriated the provincial officials and the all-powerful police, which eventually dispersed the worshipers into the Derain Log, arrested Chet Cholpanov, and betrayed him to the court. The case turned out to be loud, three lawyers went to protect the shepherd from Petersburg to Biysk. And they won the process!

Near the Belukha in the Uimon Valley, Nicholas Roerich found dozens of ancient monuments not known to science, funeral structures of the Altai. In his diaries the traveler, for example, mentions kereksurah (grazing hills, poured from large stones), stelae of nameless people, deer stones (mysterious plates covered with images of deer with abandoned horns and curly branches) Stone figures (sculptures women, called keesers and allowing to detail the cut of ancient clothes). With the stone tombs, local people have legends about long-lived tribes here. For example, a tribe with a high culture, great knowledge and a wonderful name - chud. According to the stories, the tribe was threatened with mortal danger, and it was forced to leave through its secret underground passages in an unknown direction. There is a version that the local ancient burial mounds with stone debris and there is a walled entrance to the mysterious choudi dungeons. Roerich immediately recalled the legend in India and Tibet about the underground city of the people of Agharti. The Altai old people add: Only the Chud has not gone forever. When the happy time returns, then the Chud comes again with all the treasures that have been extracted.  Impressed by what he saw and heard near Belukha, Roerich wrote in his diary: And in prehistoric and historical terms, the Altai is an unopened treasure. By the way, not so long ago archaeologists in Altai discovered a group of stone steles located strictly along one line and oriented in space so that it makes it possible to assume the existence of an ancient astronomical observatory in the vicinity of the sacred mountain.

The very beautiful ritual for collecting this totemic plant's roots remains only in the memories of elders: In order to dig up the root, the man (women are forbidden even to approach the plant) prepares as if for a pilgrimage, fulfilling all the necessary rituals. Upon finding the plant, the man prays, asking for permission from a higher deity, tengri, and then sets up a small felt ail (an Altaian yurt) over the plant (the yurt is miniature, no more than 50 cm in height). In this way, the entire plant is sheltered from tengri and kuna (sun, Altaian), and the stem with the flowers is on the ochog (hearth, Altaian). In the center of the micro-yurt, the opening at the top would be kept closed in order to prevent sunlight from reaching inside. The root is shaped like a woman's body and is considered to be animate, so the root is carefully protected from sunlight and the sky. The unearthed woman-root is wrapped in a prepared piece of white material and carefully transported home, where it is dried in an honored place in the yurt, the tör (altar across from the entrance behind the hearth, Altaian), again
covered and carefully protected from the sun's rays.

Up to 2500 pilgrims annually rise to the top of Belukha, among them there are Tibetan lamas. The places around this mountain are well known for their grace: in its vicinity there are more than 200 kinds of medicinal herbs, including golden and maral root, here bees collect exclusively fragrant honey, the fame of which is known far beyond our country. Young horns of local marals - pantas - are highly valued in medicine; on their basis they make preparations that prolong life.

With the stone tombs, local people have legends about long-lived tribes here. For example, a tribe with a high culture, great knowledge and a miraculous name - chud. According to the stories, the tribe threatened mortal danger, and it was forced to withdraw through its secret underground passages in an unknown direction. There is a version that the local ancient burial mounds with stone debris and there is a walled entrance to the mysterious choudi dungeons.

Rock paintings are also used as the magic form of witchcraft. They are an iconic symbolic means used by people at the time to communicate with natural objects, people, and the supernatural world. They seek to achieve the purpose of hunting bison and cursing bison. It is The banned curse of Buffalo's magical consciousness and the purposeful media of the hunting of bison's religious ideas. In addition, the authors of these petroglyphs, that is, the artists are usually some magicians and shamans, that is to say, some clergymen who can communicate between people and God.




I stand alone in cold autumn. The River Chuya goes north, around the promontory of Lake Teletskoye. I see the thousand mountains gone red and rows of stained forests. The great river is glassy jade swarming with one hundred boats. Eagles flash over clouds and fish float near the clear bottom. In the freezing air a million creatures compete for freedom. In this immensity I ask the huge green blue earth, who is master of nature? I came here with many friends and remember those fabled months and years of study. We were young, sharp as flower wind, ripe, candid with a scholar's bright blade and unafraid. We pointed our finger at Altai and praised or damned through the papers we wrote. The warlords of the past were cowdung. Do you remember how in the middle of the river we hit the water, splashed, and how our waves slowed down the swift junks?
Altai is vague and immense where the nine rivers pour. The horizon is a deep line threading north and south. Blue haze and rain. Hills like a snake or tortoise guard the river. The yellow crane is gone. Where? Now this tower and region are for the wanderer. I drink wine to the bubbling water-the heroes are gone. Like a tidal wave a wonder rises in my heart.
Low on the mountain our flags and banners and on the peak an echo of bugles and drums. Around us a thousand circles of enemy armies yet we are rock. No one cracks through our forest of walls, through our fortress of wills joined as one. From the front lines in Mongolia the big guns roar saying the enemy army fled in the night.
Wind and clouds suddenly rip the sky and warlords clash. War again. Rancor rains down on men who dream of a Pillow of Yellow Barley. Yet our red banners leap over the calm Biya River on our way to Xinjiang and to Mongolia the dragon cliff. The golden vase of China is shattered. We mend it, happy as we give away its meadows

Ninth Day of the Ninth Moon. It is not the firmament but man who grows old, for the ninth day of the ninth moon comes each year each year. Today at the double yang, yellow flowers on the battlefield are deeply fragrant. One day each autumn a wind batters the land. It is not spring light yet better than spring for the sky and seas are an enormous frosty horizon under the dome.

New Year's Day. Where are we going? The road is narrow. Deep in the forest the moss is slippery as we leave Xinjang, Kazakhstan, and Altai behind. We head for the foot of the tea slope. Below the mountain, below the mountain, wind blows our red banners like a painting.

On the Road to Urumqi, the whole icy sky is white and we are marching in the snow. No green pine. Mountains tower over us. As we climb the pass the wind plays open our red banners. Where are we going? To the River Katun in the haze of windy snow. We were told what to do. One hundred thousand workers and peasants marching on Urumqi, city of luck.
In June our soldiers of heaven fight against evil and rot. They have a huge rope to tie up the whale or fabulous cockatrice. On the far side of the waters the ground turns red under the strategy of Eduard Lemonov. A million workers and peasants leap up joyfully and roll up Jiangxi like a mat. As we reach the rivers of Anuy and Argut we sing the Internationale. It pierces us like a whirlwind from the sky.
Clouds pause over the Mountain of White Clouds, yet below the Mountain of White Cloudsis mad shouting, and even hollow trees and dry branches conspire. Our forest of rifles darts ahead like the ancient Flying General who flew out of heaven to chase Turkic tribesmen out of Mongolia.

Region of the Great Pines. Red orange yellow green blue violet. Who is dancing in the sky-holding the colorful ribbon of the rainbow? After rain the sun slanting down. Undulating blue hills and passes. That year the battle was hot at its peak. Bullet holes pit all the front village walls. Today they are decorations and the hills and passes are beautiful.

A hard west wind, in the vast frozen air wild geese shriek to the morning moon, frozen morning moon. Horse hoofs shatter the air and the bugle sobs. The grim pass is like ironyet today we will cross the summit in one step, cross the summit. Before us greenblue mountains are like the sea, the dying sun like blood.
Mountain. I whip my quick horse and don't dismount and look back in wonder. The sky is three feet away. Mountain. The sea collapses and the river boils. Innumerable horses raceinsanely into the peak of battle. Mountain. Peaks pierce the green sky, unblunted. The sky would fall but for the columns of mountains.

Over the earth the greenblue monster Khüiten who has seen all spring color and passion of men. Three million tigers of white jade soar and freeze the whole sky with snow. When a summer sun heats the globe rivers flood and men turn into fish and turtles. Who can judge a thousand years of accomplishments or failures?

Khuiten, you don't need all that height or snow. If I could lean on heaven, grab my sword,and cut you in three parts, I would send one to Europe, one to America, and keep one part in China, that the world have peace, and the globe share the same heat and ice.

Tavan Bogd is the Mountain of Six Circles. Dazzling sky to the far cirrus clouds. I gaze at wild geese vanishing into the south. If we cannot reach the peak we are not true men. On my fingers I count the twenty thousand lilies. We have already marched. On the summit of Tavan Bogd the west wind lazily ripples our red banner. Today we have the long rope in our hands. When will we tie up the yellow tigers of the seven stars?

The scene is the north lands. Thousands of lilies sealed in ice, ten thousand lilies in blowing snow. From the top of the mountain I gaze inside and beyond and see only vast tundra. Up and down the river Irtysh the gurgling water is frozen. Mountains dance like silver snakes, hills gallop like wax bright elephants trying to climb over the sky. On days of sunlight the planet teases us in her white dress and rouge. Rivers and mountains are beautiful and made heroes bow and compete to catch the girl lovely earth. Genghis Khan, man of his epoch and favored by heaven, knew only how to hunt the great eagle. He is gone. Only today are we true people.

Night is long. And slowly comes the crimson sun-moon dawn. Demons and monsters danced about and whirled for hundreds of years and five hundred millions were not a family. Yet in one song the cock whitens the world. Song pours on us from ten thousand corners and musicians from Urumqi play. Never before were we poets so moved.

Climbing Tsambagarav, the mountain looms firmly over the Great River. I climb four hundred bends to its green lush peak. With cool eyes I stare at the rim of mankind and the sea beyond. Hot wind blows rain in the sky and down to the river. Clouds over the nine tributaries and the floating yellow crane, where waves ripple. White mist flies up. Who knows where Tao, the ancient poet, has gone? Is he farming in the Land of the Peach Blossoms?

Early rays of sun illumine the parade grounds and these handsome girls heroic in the wind, with rifles five feet long. Daughters of China with a marvelous will, you prefer hardy uniforms to colorful silk.

White clouds hang over the Mountain of Nine Questions. The daughters of the emperor rode the wind down to a jade meadow where a thousand tears fell and dappled the bamboo. Now their dresses are a hundred folds of silk, a million sunclouds of red blossoms. In Aya Lake snow waves rise to heaven and people of the Orange Island sing and make the earth vibrate. I want to dream of the immense land of the hibiscus shiny with young morning sun.


Written on a Photograph of the Cave of the Gods: At bluegreen twilight I see the rough pines serene under the rioting clouds. The cave of the gods was born in heaven, a vast wind-ray beauty on the dangerous peak.

Wind. Lightning. Thunder over the earth. A demon is born from a heap of white bones. Slow Tripitaka can still be taught yet the blind monster-insect-a horn in its mouthspits and kills. The gold monkey swings his mammoth club and knocks ten thousand li of dust out of the air: the sky is transparent jade. Today we cheer the Great Sage for the demon mist rises again.

In Praise of the Winter Plum Blossom: Spring disappears with rain and winds and comes with flying snow. Ice hangs on a thousand feet of cliff yet at the tip of the topmost branch the plum blooms. The plum is not a delicious girl showing off yet she heralds spring. When mountain flowers are in wild bloom she giggles in all the color.

Winter clouds. Cotton snow falls heavily like many disappearing flowers. Icy brooks bubble high in the air and on earth a slender wind is warm. And the hero? He dominates the tiger and the leopard. The wind bear cannot frighten a brave man. Even the plum tree is pleased with snow and doesn't care about freezing or dying houseflies.

On our small planet a few houseflies bang on the walls. They buzz, moan, moon, and ants climb the locust tree and brag about their vast dominion. It is easy for a flea to say it topples a huge tree. In Russia leaves spill in the west wind, the arrowhead groans in the air. We had much to do and quickly. The sky-earth spins and time is short. Ten thousand years is long and so a morning and an evening count. The four oceans boil and clouds fume with rain. We wash away insects and we are strong. The five continents shake in the wind of lightning.






In Xanadu did Kubla Khan a stately pleasure dome decree: where Alph, the sacred river, ran, through caverns measureless to man down to a sunless sea. So twice five miles of fertile ground, with walls and towers were girdled round: and there were gardens bright with sinuous rills, where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree. And here were forests ancient as the hills, enfolding sunny spots of greenery.

But oh that deep romantic chasm which slanted down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
A savage place! As holy and enchanted as e'er beneath a waning moon was haunted by woman wailing for her demon lover! And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething, as if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing, a mighty fountain momently was forced, amid whose swift half-intermitted burst. Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail, or chaffy grain beneath the thresher's flail. And 'mid these dancing rocks at once and ever it flung up momently the sacred river. Five miles meandering with a mazy motion through wood and dale the sacred river ran, then reached the caverns measureless to man, and sank in tumult to a lifeless ocean. And 'mid this tumult Kubla heard from far ancestral voices prophesying war!

The shadow of the dome of pleasure floated midway on the waves, where was heard the mingled measure from the fountain and the caves! It was a miracle of rare device, a sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice!

A damsel with a dulcimer in a vision once I saw. It was an Abyssinian maid, and on her dulcimer she played, singing of Mount Abora. Could I revive within me her symphony and song? To such a deep delight 'twould win me, that with music loud and long, I would build that dome in air. That sunny dome! Those caves of ice! And all who heard should see them there, and all should cry: Beware! Beware! His flashing eyes, his floating hair! Weave a circle round him thrice and close your eyes with holy dread, for he on honey-dew hath fed and drunk the milk of Paradise.


In anguish unaccountable the steady ship that burns at dark, the small shy streetlamp of the night, floats out of Alexander Park in the exhaustion of dull bricks. Like a pale-yellow, tiny rose, it drifts along, past lovers' heads and walkers' feet. 
In anguish unaccountable sleep-walkers, drunkards, float like bees. A stranger sadly snaps a shot of the metropolis by night; a cab with squeamish passengers jolts loudly to Ordynka Street, and dead men stand in close embrace with private homes. 
In anguish unaccountable a melancholy poet swims along the town. Beside a shop for kerosene, a porter stands, round-faced and sad. A ladies man, now old. lopes down a dingy street. A midnight wedding party sways in anguish unaccountable. 
On Moscow's murky south-side streets a random swimmer sadly floats, A Jewish accent wanders down 

a yellowed melancholy stair. A fragile beauty swims alone from New Year's Eve to Saturday, exchanging love for bitterness, unable to explain her grief. 
The chilly even in g floats above 
our eyes; two trembling snowflakes strike 
the bus. A pale and numbing wind 
slaps reddened hands. The honey-gold 
of evening-lamps flows out; a scent 
of halvah fills the air. The Eve 
of Christmas holds the pie of heaven 
above its head. 
Your New Year's Day floats on a wave, within the city's purple sea, in anguish unaccountable - as though life will begin anew, an d we will live in fame and light with sure success and bread to spare; as though, from lurching to the left, life will swing right. 
 
 
The month of January has flown past 
the prison windows; I have heard the singing 
of convicts in their labyrinth of cells: 
'One of our brothers has regained his freedom' 
You still can hear the prisoners' low song, 
the echoing footsteps of the wordless wardens. 
And youyoursclfstillsing, sing silently: 
'Farewell, o January.' 
Facing the window's light, 
you swallow the warm air in giant gulps. 
But I roam once again, sunk deep in thought, 
down hallways, from the last interrogation 
to the next one - toward that distant land 
where there is neither March nor February 


Exhaustion now is a mote frequent guest, and yet I speak less often of it now. O, deeds of my domestic handicraft, warm from the workshop of my rowdy soul, 
what birds are you devising for yourself? On whom will you bestow - or barter - them? And must you live in nests of latest style and sing in concert with the latest lyre? 
Come back, my soul, and pluck a feather out, the radio can croon to us of fame. But tell me, soul, what was the look of life, how did it stand up to your soaring glance? 
Now, while the snow whirls - as if sprung entire from nothingness - by the plain - corniced walls, o street, draw me the silhouette of death, and you, o bird, shriek out the shape of life. 
For here I walk, and somewhere there you fly no longer heedful of our mutterings; for here I live, and somewhere there you cry, beating your tremulous, translucent wings, 


You're coming home again. What does that mean? Can there be anyone here who still needs you, who would still want to count you as his friend? You're home, you've bought sweet wine to drink with supper, 
and, staring out the window, bit by bit 
you come to see that you're the one who's guilty: 
the only one. That's fine. Thank God for that. 
Or maybe one should say, 'Thanks for small favors.'
It's fine that there is no one else to blame, it's fine that you are free of all connections, it's fine that in this world there is no one who feels obliged to love you to distraction. 
It's fine that no one ever took your arm 
and saw you to the door on a dark evening, 
it's fine to walk, alone, in this vast world 
toward ho me from the tumultuous railroad station. 
It's fine to catch yourself, while rushing home, mouthing a phrase that's something less than candid; you're suddenly aware that your own soul is very slow to take in what has happened. 



Great-hearted Hector has been speared to death. His soul is swimming through the darkened waters where bushes rustle and white clouds go black. The far sobs of Andromache are muted. 
Now mighty Ajax; on this gloomy night, 
wades knee-deep in the stream's transparent ripples, 
and life runs out of his great, staring eyes 
toward Hector, Ajax walks chest-deep. The darkness 
has brimmed the deep well of his gaze; it stains 
the bright warm waves, the restless underbrush. 
The waters now have fallen to his waist; 
his heavy sword, caught up by the swift stream, 
sweeps out ahead 
- and carries mighty Ajax in its wake. 


The tenant finds his new house wholly strange. 
His quick glance trips on unfamiliar objects 
whose shadows fit him so imperfectly 
that they themselves are quite distressed about it. 
But this house cannot stand its emptiness. 
The lock alone - it seems somehow ungallant - 
is slow to recognize the tenant's touch 
and offers brief resistance in the darkness. 
This present tenant is not like the old - 
who moved a chest of drawers in, and a table, 
thinking that he would never have to leave; 
and yet he did: his dose of life proved fatal. 
There's nothing, it would seem, that makes them one; 
appearance, character, or psychic trauma. 
And yet what's usually called 'a home' 
is the one thing that these two have in common, 


The night-black sky shone brighter than his legs; he could not drift into dissolving dark 
That evening, sprawling by an open fire, we caught our first sight of the raven steed. 
I have seen nothing in this world more black — the very color of his limbs was coal His body was as black as emptiness, blacker than night, from mane to trembling tail His flanks, which bore a blackness set apart, had never known the saddle's bruising mark. He stood unmoving, and he seemed to sleep. But terror stalked the blackness of his hooves. 
So black was he that shadows made no stain; they could not dye him darker than he stood. He was as black as any midnight dark or any needle's fierce unfathomed heart - as black as the dense trees that loom ahead, as the tense void between the nested ribs, the pit beneath the earth where a seed lies. I know that here within us all is black - 
and yet he gleamed still blacker to our gaze! It was no more than midnight by my watch. He came no closer by the slightest step. Unplumbed obscurity lurked at his loins. His back had wholly vanished from our sight; no single spot of light now lingered there. 
36 

The whites of his two eyes struck like twin blows. Their pupils were more terrifying still, 
with the strange leer of eyes in negatives! 
But why then did he interrupt his flight 
to watch beside us till the morning dawned? 
Why did he stand so close against the fire? 
Why did he breathe the blackness of that air, 
and crush the brittle bones of fallen leaves ? 
Why did he blaze black light from those great eyes ? 
- He sought to find a rider in our midst. 



The fire, as you can hear, is dying down. 
The shadows in the corners have been shifting. 
It's now too late to shake a fist at them 
or yell at them to stop what they are doing. 
This legion does not listen to commands. 
It now has closed its ranks and forms a circle. 
In silence it advances from the walls, 
and I am suddenly at its dead center. 
The bursts of darkness, like black question marks, 
are mounting higher steadily and higher. 
The dark drifts down more densely from above, 
engulfs my chin, and crumples my white paper. 
The clock hands have completely disappeared. 
One cannot see them, and one cannot hear them. 
There's nothing left but bright spots in one's eyes - 
in eyes that now seem frozen and unmoving 
The fire has died. As you can hear, it's dead. 
The bitter smoke swirls, clinging to the ceiling. 
But this bright spot is stamped upon one's eyes 
Or rather it is stamped upon the darkness. 
 

John Donne has sunk in sleep... All things beside 
are sleeping too: walls, bed, and floor - all sleep. 
The table, pictures, carpets, hooks and bolts, 
clothes-closets, cupboards, candles, curtains - all 
now sleep: the washbowl, bottle, tumbler, bread 
breadknife and china, crystal, pots and pans, 
bed-sheets and night lamp, chests of drawers, a clock, 
a mirror, stairway, doors. Night everywhere, 
night in all things: in corners, in men's eyes, 
in bed-sheets, in the papers on a desk 
in the worm-eaten words of sterile speech, 
in logs and fire-tongs, in the blackened coals 
of a dead fireplace - in each thing. 
In undershirts, boots, stockings, shadows, shades 
behind the mirror; in the backs of chairs, 
in bed and washbowl, in the crucifix, 
in linen, in the broom beside the door, 
in slippers. All these things have sunk in sleep. 
Yes, all things sleep. The window. Snow beyond. 
A roof-slope, whiter than a tablecloth, 
the roof's high ridge. A neighborhood in snow, 
carved to the quick by this sharp window frame. 
Arches and walls and windows - all asleep. 
Wood paving-blocks, stone cobbles, gardens, grills. 
No light will flare, no turning wheel will creak,,. 
Chains, walled enclosures, ornaments, and curbs. 
Doors with their rings, knobs, hooks are all asleep - 
their locks and bars, their bolts and cunning keys. 
One hears no whisper, rustle, thump, or thud. 
Only the snow creaks. All men sleep. Dawn comes 
not soon. All jails and locks have lapsed in sleep. 
The iron weights in the fish-shop arc asleep. 
The carcasses of pigs sleep too. Backyards 
and houses. Watch-dogs in their chains lie cold. 
In cellars sleeping cats hold up their ears. 
Mice sleep, and men. And London soundly sleeps. 
A schooner nods at anchor. The salt sea 
talks in its sleep with snows beneath her hull, 
and melts into the distant sleeping sky. 
John Donne has sunk in sleep, with him the sea. 
Chalk cliffs now tower in sleep above the sands. 
This island sleeps, embraced by lonely dreams, 
and every garden now is triple-barred. 
Pines, maples, birches, firs, and spruce-all sleep. 
On mountain slopes steep mountain-streams and paths 
now sleep. Foxes and wolves. Bears in their dens. 
The snow drifts high at burrow-entrances. 
All the birds sleep. Their songs are heard no more. 
Nor is the crow's hoarse caw. At night the owl's 
dark hollow laugh is quenched. The open fields 
of England now are stilled. A clear star flames. 
The mice are penitent. All creatures sleep. 
The dead lie calmly in their graves and dream. 
The living, in the oceans of their gowns, 
sleep - each alone-within their beds. Or two 
by two. Hills, woods, and rivers sleep. All birds 
and beasts now sleep-nature alive and dead. 
But still the snow spins white from the black sky. 
There, high above men's heads, all arc asleep. 
The angels sleep. Saints - to their saintly shame - 
have quite forgotten this our anxious world. 
Dark Hell-fires sleep, and glorious Paradise. 
No one goes forth from home at this bleak hour. 
Even God has gone to sleep. Earth is estranged. 


Eyes do not see, and ears perceive no sound. 
The Devil sleeps. Harsh enmity has fallen 
asleep with him on snowy English fields. 
All horsemen sleep.1 And the Archangel, with 
his trumpet. Horses, softly swaying, sleep. 
And a 11 the cherubim, in one great host 
embracing, doze beneath St Paul's high dome. 
John Donne has sunk in sleep. His verses sleep. 
His images, his rhymes, and his strong lines 
fade out of view. Anxiety and sin, 
alike grown slack, sleep in his syllables. 
And each verse whispers to its next of kin, 
'Move on a bit.' But each stands so remote 
from Heaven's Gates, so poor, so pure and dense, 
that all seems one. All are asleep. The vault 
austere of iambs soars in sleep. Like guards, 
the trochees stand and nod to left and right 
The vision of Lethean waters sleeps. 
The poet's fame sleeps soundly at its side. 
All trials, all sufferings, are sunk in sleep. 
And vices sleep. Good lies in Evil's arms. 
The prophets sleep. The bleaching snow seeks out, 
through endless space, the last un whitened spot. 
All tilings have lapsed in sleep. The swarms of books, 
the streams of words, cloaked in oblivion's ice, 
sleep soundly. Every speech, each speech's truth, 
is sleeping. Linked chains, sleeping, scarcely clank. 
All soundly sleep: the saints, the Devil, God. 
Their wicked and their faithful servants. Snow 
alone sifts, rustling, on the darkened roads. 
And there are no more sounds in all the world. 
But hark! Do you not hear in the chill night a sound of sobbing, whisperings of fear? 


There someone stands, disclosed to winter's blast, and weeps. There someone stands in the dense gloom. His voice is thin, His voice is needle-thin, yet without thread. And he in solitude swims through the falling snow - cloaked in cold mist that stitches night to dawn. The lofty dawn. 'Whose sobs are those? My angel, is it you? Do you await my coming, there alone beneath the snow? Walking - without my love-in darkness home ? Do you cry in the gloom?' No answer. - ' Is it you, o cherubim, whose muted tears put me in mind of some sepulchral choir ? Have you resolved to quit my sleeping church? Is it not you?  No answer. —  Is it you> o Paul? Your voice most certainly is coarsened by stern speech. Have you not bowed your grey head in the gloom to weep?' But only silence makes reply. ' Is that the Hand which looms up everywhere to shield a grieving glance in the deep dark? Is it not thou, Lord? No, my thought runs wild. And yet how lofty is the voice that weeps/ No answer. Silence. - ' Gabriel, have you not blown your trumpet to the roar of hounds? Why did I stand alone with open eyes while horsemen saddled their swift steeds? Yet each thing sleeps. Enveloped in huge gloom, the Hounds of Heaven race in packs. O Gabriel, do you not sob, encompassed about by winter dark, alone, with your great horn?' 
No, it is I, your soul, John Donne, who speaks. I grieve alone upon the heights of Heaven, because my labors did bring forth to life 


feelings and thoughts as heavy as stark chains. 
Bearing this burden, you could yet fly up 
past those dark sins and passions, mounting higher. 
You were a bird, your people did you see 
in every place, as you did soar above 
their sloping roofs. And you did glimpse the seas, 
and distant lands, and Hell-first in your dreams, 
then waking. You did see a jewelled Heaven 
set in the wretched frame of men's low lusts. 
And you saw Life: your Island was its twin. 
And you did face the ocean at its shores. 
The howling dark stood close at every hand. 
And you did soar past God, and then drop back, 
for this harsh burden would not let you rise 
to that high vantage point from which this world 
seems naught but ribboned riven and tall towers - 
that point from which, to him who downward stares, 
this dread Last Judgement seems no longer dread. 
The radiance of that Country does not fade. 
From there all here seems a faint, fevered dream. 
From there our Lord is but a light that gleams, 
through fog, in window of the farthest house. 
The fields lie fallow, furrowed by no plough. 
The years lie fallow, and the centuries. 
Forests alone stand, like a steady wall, 
Rain batters the high head of giant grass. 
The first woodcutter - he whose withered mount, 
in panic fear of thickets, blundered thence-
will climb a pine to catch a sudden glimpse 
of fires in his own valley, far away. 
All things are distant. What is near is dim. 
The level glance slides from a roof remote. 
All here is bright. No din of baying hound 
or tolling bell disturbs the silent air. 


And, sensing that all things are far away, 
he'll wheel his horse back quickly toward the woods. 
And instantly, reins, sledge, night, his poor mount, 
himself-will melt into a Scriptural dream. 
But here I stand and weep. The road is gone. 
I am condemned to live among these stones. 
I cannot Hy up in my body's flesh; 
such flight at best will come to me through death 
in the wet earth, when I've forgotten you, 
my world, forgotten you once and for all. 
T11 follow, in the torment of desire, 
to stitch this parting up with my own flesh. 
But listen! While with weeping I disturb 
your rest, the busy snow whirls through the dark, 
not melting, as it stitches up this hurt - 
its needles flying back and forth, back, forth! 
It is not I who sob. It's you, John Donne: 
you lie alone. Your pans in cupboards sleep, 
while snow builds drifts upon your sleeping house-
while snow sifts down to earth from highest Heaven. 
Like some great bird, he sleeps in his own nest, his pure path and his thirst for purer life, himself entrusting to that steady star which now is closed in clouds. And like a bird, his soul is pure, and his life's path on earth, although it needs must wind through sin, is still closer to nature than that tall crow's nest which soars above the starlings' empty homes. Like some great bird, he too will wake at dawn; but now he lies beneath a veil of white, while snow and sleep stitch up the throbbing void between his soul and his own dreaming flesh. All things have sunk in sleep. But one last verse awaits its end, baring its fangs to snarl that carnal love is but a poet's duty-spiritual love the essence of a priest. Whatever millstone these swift waters turn will grind the same coarse grain in this one world. For though our life may be a thing to share, who is there in this world to share our death? Man's garment gapes with holes. It can be torn, by him who will, at this edge or at that. It falls to shreds and is made whole again. Once more it's rent. And only the far sky, in darkness, brings the healing needle home. Sleep John Donne, sleep. Sleep soundly, do not fret your soul. As for your coat, it's torn; all limp it hangs. But see, there from the clouds will shine that Star which made your world endure till now. 
 


Once more we're living by the Bay of Naples ;r and clouds of black smoke drift, daily, above us. Our own Vesuvius has cleared its throat; volcanic ash is settling in the side-streets. Our windowpanes have rattled to its roaring. Some day we too will be shrouded with ashes. 
And when that happens, at that awful moment, 
I'd like to take a streetcar to the outskirts 
of town and find your house; 
and if, after a thousand years, 
a swarm of scientists should come here 
to dig our city out, I hope they'll find me, 
cloaked with the ashes of our modern epoch, 
and everlastingly within your arms. 

 
When I embraced these shoulders, I beheld 
the room as it was now revealed beyond us. 
I saw how a straight chair pushed from the wall 
had blended with the brilliant glow behind it. 
The huge bulb in the lamp was far too strong - 
its fierce glare made worn furniture look hollow; 
the threadbare cover of the sofa shone 
so greenly brown as to seem almost yellow. 
The table stood deserted, and the floor 
lay gleaming, while the stove seemed dark; a dusty 
wood frame held a stiff landscape. The sideboard 
appeared to be alone among the living. 
A moth, aflutter in this empty blaze, 
shook my fixed stare out of its frozen orbit.1 
If any ghost had tried to haunt this place, 
he must have left, for surely he abhorred It, 


Dreams rock the blanket-universe. But someone strains to see the ocean; it looms in the black night, sliced off by sharp knives of the window casing. The shrubs have trapped a moon-balloon- Row boats are sunk in conversation; they say the bright shoes in this room will never crush the shells of oysters. 
A hand thatholds a pillow fast 
is creeping down a polished bedpost, 
making its way to a cloud breast 
by this inept and tongue-tied gesture. 
A sock, torn on a jagged rock, 
twists in the dark; its curve is swan-like. 
Its funnel mouth is all agog; 
it stares up like a blackened fishnet. 
The wall helps us to have two seas (perhaps we're helped by hazy thinking), divided up in such a way that two dark nets, which still hang empty> at depths that one can scarcely plumb, wait to be dragged up to the surface by double lines lashed to the bars that form a cross in the wide window. 
A star glows yellow on the waves; the rowboats loom, bereft of motion. Framed in the window, the great cross slowly revolves, like a winch turning. The two nets move at steady pace from empty depths up to the surface; they hope that the revolving cross will pull them in and cast them elsewhere. 
All this takes place without a sound. 
The empty window still is hopeful, 
despite die house's fixity, 
that the next net will come in loaded. 
The window1 in this dark night sees 
(the moon has made its whole world brighter) 
how flower beds roll in like waves, 
and front-yard shrubs crash down like breakers. 
The house is motionless, the fence 
dives in the dark, with its bright cork-floats; 
a hatchet stuck in the front steps 
keeps its sharp eye on the wet dock-posts. 
A clock is chattering. Far off 
the grumbling of a speedboat's motor 
drowns out the crunch of oyster shells 
stamped under by a flesh less walker. 
Two eyes emit a piercing scream. The eyelids close, with a vague rustle, like oyster shells curved in the gloom to cover and protect the pupil. How long until this pain is gone, swamped by the talk of outboard motors, to break out then on a warm arm as pale scars of a vaccination? 
How long? Till morning? Surely not. The wind attempts, with a faint murmur, 

to lift the jasmine veil that blocks the open face of the blank gateway.

 
Never, never forget: how the waves lashed the docks, and the wind pressed upward like submerged life-buoys. 
- How the seagulls chattered, sailboats stared at the sky, 
- How the clouds swooped upwards like wild ducks flying. 
May this tiny fragment of the life we then shared beat in your heart wildly like a fish not yet dead. 
May the bushes bristle. May the oysters snap. May the passion cresting at your lips make you grasp 
- without words - how the surf of these breaking waves brings fresh crests to birth in the open sea. 


 
You'll flutter, robin redbreast, from those three raspberry bushes, thus - in my unfreedom - recalling how the thick-napped lupin field at dusk invades the tranquil green-pea kingdom. You'll flutter through the closely packed moustache of pussywillows, where countless dew droplets, their tiny hearts stunned by the sudden shock, will cascade down the green slopes of the pea-pods. 
Spasms will rack the raspberry bush, yet 
a rid die lingers. It may just have happened: 
some hunter, as he lays his trap, has stepped 
incautiously and sets a dead branch crackling. 
In fact, only a thin ribbon of path 
twists through the darkness, ashen white and serious; 
unheard here: gurgling, or a rifle shot-
unseen; Aquarius, or Sagittarius. 
The night moves on inverted wings, aloft, above dense bushes that now hang upside-down-insistent, like the memory of the past, a silent past that seems somehow to live on. 



We'll go and live together by the shore; huge dams will wall us from the continent, A home-made lamp will hurl its warming glow across the roundness of our centered space. We shall wage war at cards, and cock an ear to catch the crashing of the maddened surf. We'll gently cough, or sigh a soundless sigh, whenever the wind roars too raucously. 
I shall be old, and you will still be young. But, as the youngsters say, we'll count the time that's left us till the new age breaks in days, not years. In our reversed, small Netherland we'll plant a kitchen-garden, you and I; and we shall sizzle oysters by the door, and drink the rays of the sun's octopus, 
Let summer rains crash on our cucumbers; 
we'll get as tanned as any Eskimo, 
and you will run your fingers tenderly 
along the virgin where I'm unburned. 
I'll see my collarbone in the clear glass, 
and glimpse a mirrored wave behind my back, 
and my old Geiger counter, cased in tin, 
that dangles from its faded, sweat-soaked strap 
When winter comes, unpitying, it will twist off the thatch from our wood roof. And if we make a child, we'll call the boy Andrei, Anna the girl, so that our Russian speech, 
imprinted on its wrinkled little face, shall never be forgot. Our alphabet's first sound is but the lengthening of a sigh and thus may be affirmed for future time. 
We shall wage war at cards until the tides 
retreating sinuosities draw us 
with all our trumps, down and away.., 
Our child will gaze in silence at a moth, 
not fathoming its urgent moth-motives 
for beating at our lamp. But then the time 
will come when he must make h is way back through 
the dam that walls us from the continent.
