You ask me: why bring all these texts together in this book? Why'Deleuze and Queer Theory'? What does this and mean? You wonderwhether it might be the expression of an opposition that will lead to abattle, a combat; a war that will announce winners and dark horses, willdeclare the past dead and will celebrate a new future. Or maybe, it is ahope for juxtaposition and collaboration based on resonances, or differences.An attempt for reconciliation through the annihilation of the differentialparties perhaps?
And as the middle space, the borderline that separates but also bringstogether; and as the transit word, a force of transition towards somethingother that always entails a coming back: the becoming-DeleuzoGuattarianof Queer Theory, the becoming-queer of Deleuze's and Guattari's theory.And as the invisible in-between, the mystery gap, the topos of hidden eroticconnections, of contagious exchange, of unnatural encounters based onimperceptible micro-attractions and incompatibilities; and as the experimentto think as two, to rethink through a two-fold process that amplifieswhat goes on in one's thinking, that expands one single concept (queer),transforming it from a materialising signifier to an intrinsic quality of nonrepresentational thinking.
Thus, this project is primarily creative and not critical, and it is criticalprecisely by being creative. Rather than dismissing queer (theory), this collectivework reaffirms the seductive power of the concept 'queer', and itscontinuing force to inspire thinking nowadays. Moving beyond, or along,lines of queer theory (in its institutionalised Anglo-American form) constitutesa living proof of the vital force of the concept of queerness: theforce to affect and effect changes in the way one theorises, its capacity toproduce deviant lines along established thinking and disciplines, its abilityto queer the queer, that is, to undermine the self, to resist any normalisation.Hence, this collection emerges out of the queer's fear of being trapped in iteration, immobility, its loathing for reproduction, for repetition ofsameness. Rather than starting from negation (which would be to diminishthe tremendous intellectual accomplishments set in motion by GenderTrouble and the theory of performativity), it is born out of the positive andaffirmative thinking that departs from the belief that one paradigm cannotcarry an entire field, if that field is going to survive and thrive.Moreover, by putting side by side the English term 'queer' (nontranslatablein other languages and credited as an American invention)with a French thinking (Deleuze's and Guattari's thinking), it attempts toremind us of the often neglected intervention on the part of French thinking(s) after '68, in relation to non-normative sexualities and the notion ofa destabilised self (for example, Foucault's homosexual subject, Cixous'sbisexuality, Lacan's homosexuelle, Hocquenghem's homosexual desire).Despite the significant contribution of French philosophy, psychoanalysisand feminism to the exploration and enhancement of polymorphous, 'perverse'sexualities and of the notion of a de- normalised self, we neverthelessbelieve that 'it is especially in the writings of Gilles Deleuze and FélixGuattari that the question of homosexuality as queering, that is, asbecoming and as an ongoing differing of difference, is raised' (Conley, thisvolume).
You thus wonder what this volume brings that is new in relation toqueer theory, how its contribution differs from other theories of (sexual)difference (for example, psychoanalysis), and even more, how it queersqueer theory in a positive and affirmative way that escapes the traditionalstrategy of negation (queer as the non-, anti-, contra-) and while I am listeningto you talking, another question enters my mind: 'Is queer theorya reflection on what it means to be queer, or does the concept of queernesschange the ways in which we theorise?' (Colebrook, this volume).Whereas the first question presupposes a 'being' that is queer, and hencethat theory is a mere reflection, mirroring, moulding, a grasping of whatalready exists as given or produced: the queer performative 'being' as aculturally given way of being queer, or better, a way of doing queer thatconstructs a supposed preceding being - 'the doer', which has neverthelessalways been the deed1 - the latter on the other hand signifies arupture in the established ways of thinking, suggesting an intrinsic queernessin thinking and in theorising that breaks away from a represen -tational thought, with the latter confusing what exists with what canbe known (a conflation of ontology with epistemology). Where theButlerian theory of performativity fits into the first definition, theDeleuzoGuattarian thinking is inherently queer by distancing itself froma representational conception of thinking; hence, a thinking, which far from being reproductive (by representing, recognising) is primarily productivemainly by being expressive of non/extra-linguistic forces.
Hence, what strikes and troubles one in the field known as 'QueerTheory' is primarily an insistence on performativity as the only adequateway to perceive the social world and the real and the consequent refusalto 'see' a positive (rather than a constitutive2) outside, a 'beyond' of thesignifier, discourse, language: a short-sightedness in relation to body andmateriality. I wonder if this is due to a passion for realism and pragmatism,or rather to a fear of accepting anything that goes beyond us, thesubject, the world as the lived cultural horizon. Is after all the heterosexualmatrix of imposed naturalised performances the only reality wecan imagine? Is language the only air we can breathe? Is text the onlyland we can inhabit? Is parody the only resistance we can imagine?The transvestite is a mish-mash hybrid, teeming with symbols belonging toone or another, but not ambiguous enough to be constructed through thespaces between the symbols. The male-as-female or female-as-male is anestablished alliance at war, rather than an unnatural alliance. (MacCormack,this volume)
Yes, you are certainly right to remind me that this is not one's choice.How compulsory and involuntary it is for the subject to play with therules and perform a gendered body and a gendered subjectivity in orderto be an 'I'. I can't see though why this should lead to a rigid and restrictingbelief that what exists is what can be known, that who we are islimited to the culturally known and the interpretable acted-upon; to anobsession with the textualisation of everything and the deletion of anythingthat resists the latter; to a refusal to think outside the cause-effectrelation and a consequent inability to imagine nondependent relationsand non-unifying connections. Have you ever asked yourself 'why are weso hesitant to acknowledge powers that have force and precede the act,but which cannot be known, recognised and reduced to the act?'(Colebrook 2004: 215). Is after all the reductive mechanism of interpretationthat takes us back to the Subject the only way to be in the world?And yet, why does an act always have to refer back to a constructedsubject? Why, instead of being in (constructed by) the world, can we notbecome with the world away from the image of the subject? Has subjectionalways been the case?
Whereas Foucault turned back to ancient thought to insist that one need notposit a subject and sexuality behind action, Butler argues that we cannotavoid subjection. All we can do is work critically with the systems thatproduce us as subjects. (Colebrook 2004: 212)

On the other hand, I can understand pretty well your fear of the asubjective.One's celebration of the a-subjective, the imperceptible constitutesfor an all-too Subjective thinking and culture a risky act, adangerous black hole, since the latter assumes that without the linguisticorganisation of the Subject, there is no-thing, no-body, no history, andthat the only body that can exist is that which is created and assumed bya human and rational culture.3 However, one's experience of this as a riskmakes quite obvious that for the theory of performativity 'it is thesubject - the subject of language, sexuality and consciousness or culture -who is the ground and origin of all distinction and difference' (Colebrook2004: 207). Thus, contrary to its claims, such a thinking remains a prisonerof the 'episteme of Man',4 a (neo-) Cartesian-like mind of a differentiatingnature in opposition to a matter that lacks any intrinsicdifferentiating properties.
Within this framework, difference can only be conceived of as a deviationfrom one, single model: a hierarchical differentiation starting anddescending from the dominant signifier (the white (hu)man Face, themajoritarian, white, hetero, able bodied male) (Shildrick, this volume)that leads to a prolific production of minoritarian others always inresponse to the established norms. It thus fails to conceive of differencebeyond the level of the signifier, outside the Law; so that 'our' claim fora positive difference that precedes signification and pre-exists constitutionis simply unimaginable, unintelligible within a linguistic framework.It seems for you, difference can only bear the majoritarian definition ofminoritarian others, since it is doomed to remain the product of an either/or process: an exclusionary, traumatising difference working throughnegation, identification and melancholy that produces different-othersalways stuck in inferior positions.
Accordingly, queer is always already in response to a dominant heterosexualmatrix: a solely reactive force of re-signification, mockery, disrespectto the dominance of heterosexuality, to the power of the norms;'a force [that] denies all that it is not and makes this negation its ownessence and the principle of its existence' (Deleuze 2005: 9). Queer thenis conceived of as solely a transformation from within, as the parody ofthe two genders without which, however, we fail to be/do queer.However, one may ask to what extent such transformation is not alreadyprescribed by the discourses, the structures and the ideologies that produceit. (Parisi, this volume)
Yes I know, 'we' may sound to you more abstract than the usual studyof the social, linguistic, semiological, cultural structures that undergo identity and subjectivity, in the sense of considering oppression, dominanceand subjectification in 'their ontological determinations and representativefunctions' (Olkowski 1999: 2). However, you don't seem tonotice how much more particular the focus and perception is now: adeparture from one's thinking about constructed wholes and identities,which in turn produces another discussion about (queer) subjectivities/identities, so that one instead shifts the focus to the micro, themolecular: singular acts and practices of a non-referential nature,organs and body-parts in their unnatural, anarchic connection, microsexualitiesbubbling underneath the organism, qualitative multiplicitiesconsisting of micro-singularities, pre-constituted differences of a nonlinguisticcharacter, 'an entire world of unconscious micropercepts,unconscious affects' (Deleuze and Guattari 2003: 213). You see, Ibelieve that the refusal to see the dilemma of 'universality versus difference'that has long underpinned feminist and queer debates, as the onlypolitical way to think and act, opens up the notion of the political toredefinitions: not an attempt to change the rules of the game (of languageand signification) then, but an attempt to challenge the gameitself, by abstracting thinking and narrowing down the focus to themicro, the molecular, the singular, the imperceptible.
'Identity involves a narrowing down of the internal complexities of asubject for the sake of social convention' (Braidotti 2006). The bookdeparts from this position, and no call for a supposed political realismand pragmatism should make one overlook it (after all, the capitalistsystem very often deliberately conflates pragmatism with utilitarianism!).I am not just against this or that particular identity as not being politicallyuseful, but against the very concept of identity and the thinking itengenders: a thinking that works through comparison, resemblance,analogy. However, by refusing to work with identities one is no less pragmaticor realist - on the contrary, the lines of this book constitute a'trip through "more reality” ' (Deleuze 2006: 27). Contrary to what youmight assume about abstractness and a technophilic obsession with'machines', I am here to welcome the return of 'real' bodies and 'real'matter. A body whose forces and potentialities cannot be reduced to itscultural representations and the norms of gender; a matter that is nolonger seen as static and passive, a blank slate written by language andculture, but as energy and movement in variation, as modulation (andnot as mould) that produces singularities.
Far from beginning with the generic idea of an undifferentiatedhumanity that gets differentiated through a (re-)productive performativity,I conceive of life forces and materiality as being in principle more sexual, desiring and differential than our impoverished human, genderedsexuality, as the latter is trapped within anthropomorphic sex binaries,and subjectifying gender roles.
Sexual liberation is a mystification. Liberation will occur when sexualitybecomes desire, and desire is the freedom to be sexual, that is, to be somethingelse at the same time. (Guattari 1996: 56)
At odds with you, for me sex comes back to sexuality in a twofold sense:as the radically and singularly differentiating body-machines (a thousandtiny sexes), as well as in the sense of raw (a-signified) materiality anddirectness in connecting and relating.
Please be quiet. One needs silence, so as to hear the sound of whatis coming; a rather abstract feeling that the (in)coming event/thinking/book echoes a new motto: 'intensive sexes and not sexual identities,larval sexes and not agents of sex, rhythmic sexes and not repetitive sex'(Parisi, this volume). Bringing sex back to an a-sexual gendered world ofa reproduced sameness would thus mean bringing materiality back to alinguistic landscape5 so that language ceases to make any (common)sense. Moreover, it would signal the opening up of myriad possibilitiesfor the different bodies to relate to the world differently: 'desire as sexualityand "everything else” ' (MacCormack, this volume), 'differentiating(as) making connections and commitments' (Olkowski, this volume)
No longer an issue of sexual orientation, object-choices, lack -ing desires and gender combinations, one dares to think body and(homo)sexu ality essentially: that is, by defining their being through theircapacity for becoming, in terms of a productive desire ('to become gayhas to do first and foremost not with identity but with desire' (Conley,this volume)) and in relation to their 'powers or potentials, (their) capacitiesfor striving and becoming, that are not yet realised in knowledge,and that can have a force to disrupt or produce knowledges' (Colebrook2004: 236). Contrary to a definition of essence as being a monolithic anda static force of being-the-same, reproduced by established powerrelations,another essence (Colebrook 2004: 236) is imagined as the forceof a 'could have been otherwise', the principal force that keeps the futureunpredictable and thus opens up the capacity of the body to becomeotherthrough its encounters with other body-forces, through its involvementin a multiplicity of connections that changes qualitatively withevery new connection added to it - a qualitative transformation thatoccurs both in the act of relating as such, as well as in the relating parts.
So, yes you might not be able to find any recognisable political agencyin this collection of texts. How could you do it in any case, since any being (lesbian, gay, queer, subject) has been replaced by a becoming(-lesbian, -animal, -queer, -vampire, -brittlestar)? 'To fix gay identity, isto try to stabilise what has to be radically destabilised' (Conley, thisvolume); it is to congeal becoming into being. A becoming that from ahumanistic perspective constitutes a high risk, since it can be read as participatingin the 'othering' of lesbians and gays in the negative sense.Nevertheless, 'we must learn to live and to embrace the destruction andre-articulation of the human in the name of a more capacious and, finally,less violent world, not knowing in advance what precise form ourhumanness does and will take' (Butler 2004: 35). Hence, what you conceiveof as immoral - the non-humanistic connections - constitutes foranOther the exit from an unethical, all-absorbing humanism, with thelatter being established and developed upon binaristic others. An exitachieved not by imitation or transition from one state to the other (fromthe man-order to that of animals, vegetables, and so on) - a becomingdoes not have an object, nor a subject - but through a symbiotic modelthat expresses the interconnectedness of all life elements; an interconnectionthat a humanistic perception is blind to, so as to establish itselfas the dominant discourse.
I can very well understand, even sympathise with, the great difficultyof escaping the image of the subject as the centre of life, as the centre ofall events, of abandoning the long historical obsession with the aboutnessthat precedes the subject (everything is about the subject after all!).However, it is precisely on the non/post-human level that real interactionbegins with all those minoritarian others, excluded by an all-powerfulhumanistic discourse. The risk ceases to be that real anymore andbecomes even less universal, since it appears to threaten only one particularthinking - the ego-thinking - that trembles before anything thatmight dethrone the subject from its transcendent-linguistic position andfeels dizzy at the possibility of giving up the strategy of 'being' and takingthe risk to experiment instead with non-human becomings that operateon the same level with all organic and non-organic elements.
Unlike you, I do believe that it is worthwhile for us to take the riskand lose the Face, so as to imagine, form and actualise new formsof political agency: instead of communities of an identitarian logic,machinic assemblages,6 instead of the individual, a 'crowd' (Olkowski,this volume); instead of identities, singularities; instead of representations,expressions; instead of interpretations, codings7 through mappings;instead of signifiers, signs 'which flash across the interval of adifference' (Deleuze 2004: 281). Perhaps this is what 'we' hope for thisbook: to produce a collective enunciation, a heterogeneous voice that will put some activism into thinking. And the very moment this 'we' isarticulated I can hear its stuttering effects: a 'discordant harmony'(Olkowski, this volume), variation notes, a becoming-in-musicality thatproduces an endlessly improvised, indefinite 'we'.
As you may have already noted, my discourse moves in-between a'we', a 'one' and an 'I', all used interchangeably, when referring to thiscollection; an undecidability that aims at making clear that it is not theeditor's intention to talk on behalf of the contributors or to present onesingle, personal discourse (the editorial voice) that pulls together all thedifferent ideas and styles of writing that follow. On the contrary, it constitutesan attempt to make room for what follows: not one, single, coherenttheory on sexuality and difference, but an assemblage of texts, ofmultiple voices, of writings-in-variation; a thinking together that presupposesa thinking in solitude, the sharing of a territory in difference.
Far from constituting then a 'root-book' (that is, a coherent, organicnarrative with rationally ordered ideas), this collection works as an'assemblage-book',8 consisting of different plateaus that create a smoothspace of thought, where thinking becomes nomadic, and the 'arborescent'9 structure gives way to the assembling model of a qualitative multiplicity.Therefore, the 'lack' of coherence in structure - what I call amultiplicity of voices - is part of the experimental character of the book.Very often experimentation requires the 'sacrifice' of established (epistemological)values like 'coherence', as well as the occasional adoption of amore playful writing, which should not be seen as signifying the lack ofseriousness in argumentation. Besides, what is more serious than takingthe risk to experiment and expose the self outside the established lines?You even seem puzzled and express anxiety at the 'lack' of disciplinein thinking, and the mobility of the terms used in this collection (theirbecoming-in-meaning). Moreover, you claim to feel estranged by theadoption of a new, foreign vocabulary. Yet, we believe that resistanceand wilful political action begin with the realisation of 'the needfor a queer methodology for the production of a new vocabulary'(Halberstam 2004), the production of a new language, since 'queer isthe pure indeterminate [. . .] of the unspeakable and unrepresentable,not because queer is aberrant but because within majoritarian languagethere are no words' (MacCormack, this volume). Thus, we suggest anew queer methodology (or methodologies?), which draw(s) on theDeleuzoGuattarian philosophy of positive forces and affirmative actions:the affirmation of an ontology of becoming, in the sense of 'rhizomaticrelatedness' (Tuhkanen, this volume), as well as of an open futurity, interms of virtualities and not mere possibilities.

Probably your general discomfort derives from my queerness and theresulting desire to always want to practise and experience 'the consequencesnot only of taking an author from behind, but also of beingtaken from behind by an author' (Kemp, this volume). I wonder, what ismore queer than being taken from behind by thinking?

And yes you are right. I may fall short of 'seriousness' from time totime, but the significance of parodying the proper, the expected, and theserious enough, as the ultimate queer act, seems to be far too internalised.

Hence, my rhetorical articulations, or what you call euphoric neologismor dithyrambs of linguistic construction, are not in any case purposefullypursued. I think they are probably due to the 'discomfort Ialways suffered from: the uneasiness of being a subject torn between twolanguages, one expressive, the other critical; and at the heart of this criticallanguage, between several discourses, those of sociology, of semiology,and of psychoanalysis - but that, by ultimate dissatisfaction with all ofthem, I was bearing witness to the only sure thing that was in me (howevernaïve it might be): a desperate resistance to any reductive system. I began to speak differently.

Is queer theory a reflection on what it means to be queer, or does theconcept of queerness change the ways in which we theorise? On the onehand the concept of theory appears to be inextricably intertwined withthe concept of the human: man is that rational animal possessed of a soulcapable of intuiting the essential, or what truly is (Irwin 1988). On theother hand, the possibility of a true theory - a thinking without a normativeimage of thought - seems to be opened only after the death of Godand the death of 'man' (Deleuze 1994: 109). For Deleuze, true thoughtand true theory - a real break with the normative image of 'man' - mustinclude both the intuition of the ground from which sense, truth andproblems emerge, and must fulfil the promise of transcendental inquiry,which has all too often fallen back upon a self or subject who subtendstheory. Contrary to a popular idea of a simple anti-humanism Deleuzedoes not simply reject the intuition of essences, the eternal, genesis andgrounds; on the contrary, his work is best understood as an argument infavour of a true or superior transcendentalism which would thinkbeyond the residual humanism maintained both by forms of Kantian critiqueand by popular notions of community and interrogation (Deleuze1994: 197).
While abandoning the idea of a metaphysical outside or 'beyond'which might ground metaphysics, post-Kantian thought has neverthelessmaintained the possibility of renovating thought from within (O'Neill1989). If, in modernity, we have abandoned the idea of theoria as an intuitionof essences, we can nevertheless sustain some commitment to critique:an interrogation of our situation from within (Habermas 1992).From such a commitment to interrogation from within, or resignation toan ironic attitude, it might seem that the values of queer theory would bethe values of the postmodern, post-human, post-metaphysical attitude ingeneral. If our situatedness is, by definition, that which also counts as normal and normative, then theory as such might be intrinsically queer,as an attempt to deviate from, or pervert, that which appears self-evident,unquestionable and foundational. Accepting such a definition of queertheory would render the enterprise both parasitic and relative; queertheory would always be a solicitation of the normal, and if homosexualityand bisexuality were to become legitimate social models, then thequeer would not have withered away, but merely shifted terrain: interrogatingany supposed normality or normativity, having no intrinsicpower. What I would like to consider in this paper is a less negative formulationof queer theory, one concerned more with the intuition ofessences than with the critical distance from the natural attitude.
There are two ways to think about the theoretical point of view inmodernity. The first is critical. After Kant's 'Copernican turn' we recognisethat there can be no view from nowhere. To experience or live aworld we must be related to that world through knowledge or perception;there cannot, therefore, be any intuition of that which exists outsidethe relations through which it is received (Langton 1998). All our conceptsare concepts of some intuited world, and all our intuitions areformed as conceptually meaningful and ordered. Kant therefore definestheoretical knowledge as given through the forming power of conceptsand the receptive power of intuition. There can be no theoretical knowledgeof any supposed foundation or law that would lie beyond experience:to know is to relate to, and conceptualise, what is other thanoneself. There cannot be a theory of that which underpins experience;theory is, by definition, always situated, relational and grounded. Theorycan, however, reflect on the conditions of our situation, and this wouldyield practical rather than knowable outcomes. If there can be no lawintuitable beyond experience, then we are compelled to give a law to ourselves(O'Neill 1989). We cannot appeal to a foundation or ground, forwe are always already grounded. Theory can only tell us that we existwithin mediation and experience.
Practically, though, this recognition of our location within experienceallows for a radical anti-foundationalism. In the absence of any law orground we must give a law to ourselves, and because this law isungrounded - because there is no point of position beyond experience -no point of view can claim to speak for the law. One must give a law tooneself. As a consequence liberalism remains a primarily critical andreflective ethic. Even though one is always located, one must strive toimagine a law that could in principle be agreed to be any subject whatsoever;one must neither make an exception of oneself - say, by not actingin a manner that would be universalisable on the grounds that one knows

better - nor can one attribute one's located preferences to others. One canonly will, ethically, that which could be willed as such (Kant 1990). Sucha critical recognition of locatedness has served feminism and radical politicswell. No one can be excluded from the practice of self-determination;there can be no exclusion from the public sphere of reason on the basis ofspurious empirical claims. Thus, Mary Wollstonecraft (1975) argued thatthere was no way of knowing whether women were less capable than menat the art of reason; there could be no exclusion of women from educationand argument, for if there is such a faculty as reason then it behovesus all to extend that faculty to its highest power. It is precisely the absenceof foundations and the impossibility of basing theory on anything otherthan our situatedness that releases the subject from 'imposed tutelage' andissues in the central value of autonomy, of giving a law to oneself (Kant1990).
In addition to Kantian liberal anti-foundationalism the other possibilityfor modern political theory lies in communitarianism. On thismodel there can be no view from nowhere, but the liberal appeal to therational self-constituting individual cannot function as a legitimatepoint of departure. Selves, including the modern ideal of the auto -nomous self-critical subject, are constituted through others. One isa self only through relations; to be a self requires that one establishoneself as recognisable through time, as having this or that character.Such recognition requires others, both so that one might be recognisedas who one is now, and also so that there will be a context of norms,traditions, expectations and narratives through which one understandswhat it is to be human. On this communitarian model, theory does nottake the form of abstracting from one's particularity to produce a purelyformal procedure. Theory is not the regulation of those who would seekto exempt themselves from the claims of a universal unfounded reason.Theory is reflection on constituted norms, and is often enabled not bylimiting contradiction and particularity, but by paying acute attentionto those cultural moments when the conflict of founding (but irreconcilable)values are brought to the fore. If autonomy - relying on no lawother than the law one can give oneself - is the key value of liberal antifoundationalism,recognition is the key value of communitarianism.Both values follow from an acknowledgement of the theoreticalpredicament: that to live or be a self is to have a law, but no such lawcan be known or intuited. Autonomy asks how one must regulateoneself in the absence of a founding shared law; recognition looks atthe ways in which such shared laws are founded communally, historicallyand culturally.

Judith Butler's work, from its very beginning, has maintained the forceof both these founding values of modern theory. On the one hand, theself is not given as a knowable substance but must be performed or givento itself through action. On the other hand, such self-giving or performingis only possible through others and recognition. It is for this reasonthat Butler's work is not so much a mobilisation of twentieth-centurytheory for queer politics, but a theory in which the queer body becomesexemplary. For it is the queer body that exposes the essential tension ofautonomy and recognition. One must both be recognised as a subjectwho subtends various performances, but there must also be a self who isnot reducible to performances, such that actions can be posited intelligiblyas issuing from this or that coherent self-fashioning subject. To be aself requires that one take on a norm; one must be recognisable as this orthat subject. The condition of being a self - that one remain the samethrough time - requires a certain iterability: what one is must be repeatableor maintained. The various performances or actions that the selfundergoes must be recognisable as repetitions of some style or mode ofbeing. Gender is one of the ways in which various differing performancescan be recognised as differences of this or that sexual subject; if one'sactions do not bear this iterability then one cannot be recognised as asubject. At the same time as the self exists only in performing itself as aself to be recognised, one must not be reducible to one's performancesalone. If performances are normative, intelligible or readable then onecan be recognised as a sexual subject who exists above and beyond anyof her recognised actions. The self who asks to be recognised is, in thevery claim for recognition, never reducible to the norm or system throughwhich she speaks and performs. Without a difference or deviation in therepetitions of the norm one could not be a subject who subtends or performsthat norm. Theory, then, maintains the necessary and essentialtension between subjection (to the norm) and activation: the norm hasits being only through the various performances which also introduce differencesand instabilities.
In many respects we might consider Butler's work to be both exemplaryof the precarious model of the self that is presupposed in culturalstudies, as well as being critical of the premises of identity politics. Onthe one hand, one can be a self only through some recognisable identity;on the other hand, the performance of that identity is also the conditionfor its destabilisation and possible (but not necessarily enabling)undoing. Such a theory at once provides a way to think through theclassic problems of representation in cultural studies. How do we judgeimages of political identity? On the one hand we might argue that stereotypical representations of certain groups in the media reinforcerigid norms, preclude self-constitution and do not allow for subjectsoutside those norms to be recognised. On the other hand, there can beno creation of oneself ex nihilo. Butler's answer to the politics of representationis not to judge between good and bad representations,dividing the authentic from the imposed. Rather, the conditions of representationthemselves will yield a politics in which one can be a selfonly through the repetition of a norm, at the same time as that very repetitionis essentially queer. For the queer is not radically outside orbeyond recognition and selfhood; it is that which makes a claim to beheard as human - within the norms of speech, gender, the polity and thesymbolic - at the same time as it perverts the normative matrix. Perhapstoo much has already been said about Butler's early championing ofparody and drag (Bersani 1995), but her work is dominated by theclaim that it is the necessary repetition of a norm that both allows a selfto be recognised, at the same time as the repetition is also the self'sundoing. To perform as queer is to maintain and demand recognitionfor that which has, hitherto, exceeded the bounds of cultural recognition.Thus, the queer is that which both partakes in the norm - one canbe recognised as male or female - and destabilises that norm, for thismale or female will not take on the desires of the heterosexual matrix.
Butler's theory therefore allows for the (albeit problematic) maintenanceof identity politics; for the assertion of oneself as this or thatsubject demanding recognition is both necessary for the social system atthe same time as it introduces a necessary dynamism of the system. Atthe same time, identity politics must be recognised as queer: one is notasserting one's difference from some already recognised other. One isasserting difference as such: that one is a self only insofar as one, throughrepetition, also creates and performs differently. The condition for identityis difference, but for Butler this is iterative difference. There is not asubstance or subject who then goes through time and difference; it is therepetition of this differing act from which one posits a subject. Theory isthe recognition of the conditions of performative difference, and throughthis recognition one enables a recognition of the supposedly stable andconditioning norm as itself conditioned.
Against the model of iterative difference which allows for the criticalmaintenance of identity politics, Gilles Deleuze offers a theory of positivedifference. Crucial to the understanding of the distinction betweenthe post-Hegelian iterative model of difference and Deleuze's understandingof difference is the status of relations. In her early work onHegel, Butler explains Hegel's critique of internal relations: if relations were internal, then the way in which any being related to the worldwould be determined in advance, so that its encounters, journeys andinteractions would merely unfold what that being already is (Butler1987: 35). Against this, Hegel argues that something is only in its relations;it is not that there are beings - or even a Being - that then encounterdifference. Rather, there is difference or relationality from which pointsof stability and recognition emerge. Absolute consciousness is just thisdiffering - or not being the self-same - recognising itself. It is a relationto relationality, a consciousness aware that it is nothing other than its distanceand difference from itself. We might say, then, that we have abandonedinternal relations, for it is not as though any being determines itsworld or gives a world to itself. Rather, there is the unfolding of relationswhich allows any particular relation or difference between terms; consciousnessis just this coming to recognition of oneself as nothing morethan relationality. The essence of what something is - that which makesit what it is - is its existence, its actualisation, or the way in which it hasestablished itself as this or that complex of relations.
Butler remains committed to the idea that relations are producedthrough a process of difference and repetition. Something is identifiableas something only if it is repeated through time, but each repetition alsointroduces a certain difference or not being at one; the self in remainingitself is always subjected to, or negated by, that which is not. Deleuze alsoinsists that relations are external to terms. However, Deleuze does notallow a system or form of differentiation to exhaust the real or the potentialityof being. Rather, while relations do not follow from self-sufficientterms, Deleuze posits a positive virtual plane, or 'pure past', which isactualised in each encounter to produce both the term which is repeated,and the difference established in each term. Deleuze seeks to find synthesesof difference and repetition which are asymmetrical, positive andpre-individual. In Difference and Repetition Deleuze makes two keypoints with regard to the establishment of an active synthesising subject.First, the self who repeats and from whom relations to the world areestablished is grounded upon passive, pre-individual syntheses: the individualwho acts is composed of a thousand tiny egos, each effected froman encounter. Thus, it is not the self who must receive sensation andorganise a world, for sensations are already the effect of intensiveencounters or syntheses. And intensity's synthesis is not the repetitionthrough time of the equal - not the maintenance of this spatial being, orthis quality - but is an asymmetrical synthesis in which intensity 'is' ateach moment of its repetition different from itself. Before there is the 'I'of the self who repeats itself actively, there is the 'eye' which is already the establishment of a qualitative relation or the unfolding of an intensity.The 'eye' is the result of a passive synthesis that has organised theproblem of light, and light - as intensity - is that which might also haveunfolded or been explicated in other relations or other qualities: so thateach of our organs, according to Deleuze, is a contemplative soul, notreceiving so much determining data, but giving a quality to the intensitiesof all it encounters:
The passive self is not defined simply by receptivity - that is, by means ofthe capacity to experience sensations - but by virtue of the contractile contemplationwhich constitutes the organism itself before it constitutes thesensations. [. . .] There is a self wherever a furtive contemplation has beenestablished, wherever a contracting machine capable of drawing a differencefrom repetition functions somewhere. The self does not undergo modifications,it is itself a modification - this term designating precisely the differencedrawn. Finally, one is only what one has: here, being is formed or thepassive self is, by having. Every contraction is a presumption, a claim - thatis to say, it gives right to an expectation or a right in regard to that which itcontracts, and comes undone once its object escapes. (Deleuze 1994: 100)
Second, while the self is nothing other than repeated modifications, whatis repeated is not the actual, existing, material or bare present - and doesnot happen to an individual - but is the pure past. Each event is the actualisationof a pure potentiality, a power to be which each present repeats.All the objects that constitute an individual's reality are haunted byanother series of virtual objects that are never fully present; these are notpsychic, wished for or imagined. A virtual object opens any materialobjective individual series to a contemplation beyond the self, a pureintensity that is beyond the habitual time of the body, and the rememberedtime of the psyche. The beyond of pleasure - or the individual'sdefinition through a series of desired objects - is not an indeterminatenegativity or undifferentiated 'beyond'. Deleuze objects to psychoanalysis'grounding of the 'beyond' of pleasure on an oppositionbetween death and life, between the self and its return to a state of inanimatematter. Instead, Deleuze insists on the pure past as a virtual,eternal, intense, pre-individual and positive series which each actualisedpresent repeats. If the individual appears as so many organised, actualand life-serving objectifications - what I take to be other than myself,and towards which I am directed - this is because the individual isgrounded upon a series of virtual objects. These virtual objects are purefragments, or shreds of the past: a past that was never present and doesnot exist, but is always absent from itself and insists (Deleuze 1994:124-5).

To give this concrete form, we can note that any actualised, existing,acting, repeating subject - a self who defines itself against (autonomy)and through others (recognition) - has as its prior condition prepersonalseries. The aim of Deleuze's ethics and politics is to analyse,affirm and open these series. Most importantly, in terms of theory andthe life and humanity of theory, Deleuze insists on the importance of theground or dark precursor. Any two series of resonating differences -such as the differences of a language and the differences of our bodilyidentity - resonate with each other and can experience forced movementonly through a 'dark precursor' or ground. So, in order for the selfwho says 'I' and speaks the language of man to be co-ordinated withthe bodily movements of the self-interested, active and organisedhuman organism there has to be some silent, unstated, undecided,passive ground or sense that itself cannot be simply stated. Much ofDifference and Repetition is concerned with trying to think those silentpresuppositions of representation and identity which tie the series ofphilosophical concepts - of the self, the 'I', truth, identity and recognition- with the body of man oriented toward maintaining a state ofequilibrium.
For Deleuze, thinking beyond the human requires some forced movementwhich he introduces in Difference and Repetition as the 'beyond'of a life and pleasure of self-maintenance: this beyond would be 'death',but not a death opposed to life and Eros. Thanatos, he argues, is Eroscarried to his 'nth' power: desexualised, or rendered purely virtual andinhuman. Only here would we encounter pure intensity. The self or 'I'who loves another self (erotically) is already the effect of a whole seriesof virtual and intersubjective objects. The phallus, for example, is such avirtual object; it organises desires and bodies before their actual and individualencounters. Deleuze also refers here, and in The Logic of Sense, tothe aleatory object which allows series to resonate. So, before 'I' can loveor recognise 'you', our perceptions have already been synthesised inadvance by the sense of our encounter: the sense or orientation of whatcounts as human, what counts as love, what counts as a recognisablebody. For Deleuze this virtual plane is precisely not linguistic, for languageas such can only organise bodies after those bodies have beenintensively and affectively organised or synthesised. The true aim ofthinking or theory would be to go back to those singular points fromwhich relations and affects have been determined:
Underneath the large noisy events lie the small events of silence, just asunderneath the natural light there are little glimmers of the Idea. Singularity is beyond particular propositions no less than universality is beyond generalpropositions. Problematic Ideas are not simple essences, but multiplicities orcomplexes of relations and corresponding singularities. (Deleuze 1994: 203)How does each individual or the self who says 'I' repeat and modify avirtual series of affections, encounters and intensities that are not its ownand that might also be repeated otherwise? Against iterative difference -which is a repetition of a being that has no existence outside its seriality,or that produces that which repeats only through a maintaining of thesame through time - Deleuze insists on the positive insistence of thevirtual in all its intensity.
If we were to draw an example from genetics we might say that iterativedifference gives us the idea of an organism that would undergochange and modification through repeating itself; each generation orcopy introducing more and more instability and alterity. Deleuze's positivedifference shows how each modification of an individual is precededby micro-perceptions or encounters: before the self repeats itself there arerepetitions of intensities or pure qualities. A virus might be repeated inmy body creating not a different organism but a different potentiality -a new virus or the modification of an organ, which might then effect mybody's motility - not the ways in which I act but the ways in which I amacted upon. Difference is not the reiteration of some quality but occursthrough the eternal return of the power to create relations, to produceconnections. Concretely, this idea of difference does not yield an organismbeing modified through selection, but an individuation and selectionwhich disregards the organism, creating connections among bodies thatis the undoing of any organised body:
For the I and the Self are perhaps no more than indices of the species: ofhumanity as a species with divisions. [. . .] The I is therefore not a species;rather - since it implicitly contains what the species and kinds explicitlydevelop, in particular the represented becoming of the form - they have acommon fate, Eudoxus and Epistemon. Individuation, by contrast, hasnothing to do with even the continued process of determining species but,as we shall see, it precedes and renders the latter possible. It involves fieldsof fluid intensive factors which no more take the form of an I than of a Self.Individuation as such, as it operates beneath all forms, is inseparable froma pure ground that it brings to the surface and trails with it. (Deleuze 1994:190)
In political terms we can also distinguish iterative and positive repetition.For Butler, an individual does not exist ex nihilo but can be a self onlythrough an other which it repeats and modifies. So, for example, claiming to be a queer subject might involve laying claim to certain normative practices- such as marriage and gender - which would have the effect both ofnormalising the self by subjection to convention and recognition. To acertain extent all politics is queer politics or the negotiation between thedegrees of repetition to which the self submits and the amount of deviationor difference from normativity the self can effect. The queer is negative,defined as the difference from those conditions of recognition andnormativity which both enable and preclude autonomy. Deleuze offers aquite different ontology and ethics of non-being. We are mistaken if wethink of non-existence as the failure, deviation or difference from thepresent and actual. We need to think of non-being as positive, real andaffirmative. Each existing, actualised individual is therefore the actualisationof a non-being, which is better defined as '?-being' or as a seriesof problems. The queer self might be better thought of as a counteractualisationof the material repetitions that make up 'man'. We could seemarriage in its current bourgeois normative and heterosexual form as thesolution to a certain problem or question: how the self forms its gender,manages its desires and property, and organises its child-rearing. But thequeer self would repeat the problems that compose the self: counteractualisingthe present by drawing on the pure past of the questions fromwhich we have emerged. How might a self desire, what might count as anobject of one's desire, what relations or events might the couplings ofbodies produce and enable?
Thus, whereas Butler's model of theory is to begin with the subject andthen interrogate its conditions of possibility in the tension between recognitionand autonomy, Deleuze's theory is one of positive intuition. Here,we go beyond composed selves and problems to the affects and intensitiesfrom which they are organised. For Butler a queer theory is one inwhich the conditions of being a subject are essentially queer - one mustclaim to speak as a self, but can do so only through an other who is notoneself. At the same time, the condition for being queer is being a subject:one must be recognised as having a claim to speak, be and exist. ForDeleuze, the conditions of theory require a going 'beyond' of the self andthe organism. As long as we are concerned with identity, with the repetitionof who we are, we remain within constituted matter and lived time.To think transcendentally we need to think the pure form of time and difference,the pure intensities which each present repeats and actualisesboth in the present and for all time. For Deleuze, then, the conditions ofthe queer and the conditions of the new are the same: to counter- actualisethe present, to repeat the intensities and encounters that have composedus, but not as they are for us.

In quite specific terms this requires a radical and distinct break fromidentity politics. As long as ethics is defined as the maintenance of individualsas they are we restrict the potentiality of life to one of its constitutedforms. Only by thinking intensities beyond the human can we beginto live ethically. Thus queer politics would involve neither recognition ofthe self, nor a refusal of normativity, but the affirmation of the prepersonal.Rather than assessing political problems according to theirmeaning and convention - or the relations that organise certain affectsand desires - we need to think desires according to virtual series, all theencounters that are potential or not yet actualised.
Such a queer politics has two direct consequences. First, practically,once we abandon conditions of recognition we can interrogate a practiceaccording to the potentiality of its encounters. Rather than seeing gaymarriage, trans-gendering or gay parenting as compromised manoeuvresin which the queer self repeats and distorts given norms, we need to lookat the positivity of each encounter. How do bodies establish relations ineach case, and what powers are opened (or closed) to further encountersand modifications? Second, aesthetically, against an art of parody or dragthat would repeat the norm in order to de-stabilise it from within, positiverepetition and difference make a claim for thinking time in its purestate, those powers to differ which are pure fragments. Art would not bethe representation or formation of identities but the attempt to presentpure intensities in matter, allowing matter to stand alone or be liberatedfrom its habitual and human series of recognition. The sensations presentedin art are not those of the lived subject but are powers to be livedfor all time, allowing us to think the power of perception beyond theselves we already are.
This aesthetics would, in turn, give us a new distinct model of reading.On the critical identity-based model of queer theory, where the queer selfis the de-stabilising repetition of an enabling normativity, we look at theways in which works of art introduce a difference or dissimulation in theimage of the human. One reading of Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night'sDream, for example, might focus on the ways in which the final imageof normative heterosexual desire has to go through a certain detour ordeviation in order to arrive at is supposed destined end. Queer readingwould attend to all those moments in the text in which the normal isachieved, produced, effected and also, therefore, exposed as contingent,constituted and open to change. To a great extent the queer theory industryhas been mobilised around a re-reading of the canon's images of heterosexualdesire to show moments of instability, deviation and mobility.Deleuze, however, offers a quite distinct model of reading, both of the literary work in Difference and Repetition, and of art in general in TheLogic of Sensation and (with Guattari) in What is Philosophy? In TheLogic of Sensation (2003) Deleuze describes all art as the repetition ofthe history of art, but always with a struggle to release sensations fromtheir subjection to figuration and repetition. There is no such thing as abare canvas, for we are already composed and dominated by clichés. Thefuture can come, not through the assertion of greater and greater individuality,but only in a destruction of the personal to release the figure.This would not be the figuration of some repeatable form, but thedelineation or process of differing from which this or that determinedfigure is drawn. In Difference and Repetition Deleuze draws uponShakespeare's Hamlet and Proust's Remembrance of Things Past todescribe the profound syntheses of time that go beyond the body that iscomposed of habits, and the self that is composed of memories. The actin Hamlet exists above and beyond Hamlet's individual existence; it is apure potentiality, something that he may or may not live up to, actualiseor bring into the present. The future, or the opening of the new, can comeabout not through Hamlet drawing upon himself, his desires or his personalpast, but by living out or allowing that power to differ which existsabove and beyond him:
As for the third time in which the future appears, this signifies that the eventand the act possess a secret coherence which excludes that of the self; thatthey turn back against the self which has become their equal and smash itto pieces, as though the bearer of the new world were carried away and dispersedby the shock of the multiplicity to which it gives birth: what the selfhas become unequal to is the unequal in itself. In this manner, the I which isfractured according to the order of time and the Self which is divided accordingto the temporal series correspond and find a common descendant in theman without qualities, without self or I, the 'plebeian' guardian of a secret,the already-Overman whose scattered members gravitate around thesublime image. (Deleuze 1994: 112)
Here, for Deleuze, the art of theatre is not about the representation ofplots, individuals and desires, but somehow giving form to a power ofthe pure past. Beyond the habitual repetitions which organise a body -'this is what I do' - and beyond the repetitions that constitute a self - 'Iam who I am by being the same through time' - drama exposes thishigher repetition which destroys the self and its world of co-ordinatedactions: 'Drama has but a single form involving all three repetitions'(Deleuze 1994: 115). The task of art is the presentation of this higherpower, and reading the work of art is intuiting this power of time. InProust the art of the novelist lies in presenting a self with its habits and recollections, and then presenting the pure potentiality from which thatself was actualised: the past not as it was actually lived and recalled, butas it never was, but only could be, 'in a splendour which was never lived,like a pure past which finally reveals its double irreducibility to the twopresents which it telescopes together: the present that it was, but also thepresent which it could be' (Deleuze 1994: 107). Against a critical reading,which would look at the ways in which art or literature queers the pitchof the normal, Deleuze offers a positive reading in which temporality inits pure state can be intuited and given form as queer, as a power to createrelations, to make a difference, to repeat a power beyond its actual andalready constituted forms.

"If the original calls for a complement, it is because at the origin itwas not there without fault, full, complete, total, identical to itself."

